Now we're going to look at a robot with six
joints or six degrees of freedom and this
is a robot that moves in three dimensions.
I'm going to start by loading a model for
the Puma 560 robot and that creates a number
of robots in the workspace. Most important
of these is the variable P560, this is a MATLAB
object that represents an object. There are
a few other variables as well and these represent
particular joint angle configurations, QZ
for instance is a vector of length six with
all zeros and it represents the set of zero
joint angles for this particular robot.
The robot objects have got a lot of methods
and one of the methods; the plot method, allows
us to view the configuration of a robot, so
here is that particular robot when all the
joint angles are equal to zero. I can look
at this from a number of different viewpoints
and see the robot and we can see also the
robot end effector co-ordinate frame here
showing the X, Y and Z axes of the robot end
effector.
Now we're talking about inverse kinematics
so I want the robot to go to a particular
pose and I'm going to define that. First of
all I'm going to define it's translational
component using the function transl and I
want an X co-ordinate of 0.6, a Y co-ordinate
of 0.1 and a Z co-ordinate of 0 and now I
need to give it some orientation. And I do
that by specifying its role, pitch and yaw
angles. I want the role angle to be 0, I want
the pitch angle to be 180 degrees and I want
the yaw angle to be 0 degrees and I specify
that I have given the angles in terms of unit of degrees. And here is the homogeneous transformation
matrix representing the pose that I'm interested in.
Now let's have a look at that particular pose
and I can superimpose the pose into the figure
that contains the robot, enable hold and I
now plot that particular pose and then we
can see the co-ordinate frame which represents
this pose and we can have a look around here.
So the position associated with this pose
is the origin of this new blue co-ordinate
frame and we can see the orientation of this
new frame in terms of its X, Y and Z axes.
Now our job is to determine the joint angles
the robot needs to adopt so that its end effector
lines up with this new desired pose. Do that
using inverse kinematics. There is an inverse
kinematic method associated with the robot
object and the method's name is ikine, which
is short hand for inverse kinematics, six,
for a six degree of freedom robot and S because
it has a spherical wrist. And the only argument
that I pass in is T, the homogeneous transformation
representing the desired pose.
The result is the set of joint angles that
if the robot adopted these joint angles, it
would achieve the pose. Well let's test that,
we can move our robot to this set of joint
angles that we've just computed and we can
see here that the robot has definitely moved.
Now let's have a look around in here and see
what's happened. So we can see that the center
of the end effector is now lined up with the
center of this new co-ordinate frame that
we introduced and we can see that the X, Y
and Z axes of the robot end effector are lined
up with the X, Y and Z axes of the blue frame
that we just introduced. Now it's a little
difficult in this stick figure plot, to determine
the configuration of this particular robot.
Is this in a left handed configuration or
a right handed configuration. It's really
a bit difficult to tell, however there is
an improved way of looking at the robot, and
that's using the method Plot 3D. It takes
a little moment to get started the first time
you run it because it needs to load some detailed
CAD models of the robot into the workspace.
What we see here is then a beautifully rendered
image of the Puma 560 robot and it's quite
clear that the robot is in a left handed configuration
and the orientation of its gripper is straight
down basically in a configuration where it
could pick things up from a horizontal table.
Now we might be interested in putting the
robot into a different configuration. We can
do that by re-computing the inverse kinematics,
but this time we're going to pass in an option
R, which is asking for the joint angles that
correspond to a right handed configuration.
Here is the set of joint angles and we can
plot those and we can see now that our robot
is very clearly in a right handed configuration.
Now I could also ask for it to be in a right
handed configuration with the elbow down rather
than up and pass in the option D to indicate
that. We have now a different set of joint
angles, you see that they differ to the values
shown above and we can plot this and we can
see that our robot now is in a right handed
configuration but with its elbow down and
the wrist is in a very, very odd pose indeed.
It looks quite awkward. I can also then ask
for the robot to be in a left handed configuration
with the elbow being down and I can plot that
and it looks something like this...
What we've seen for this six degree of freedom
robot that moves in three dimensions, is that
there are in fact eight solutions for any
particular end effector pose. There is a solution
where the robot is either in a left handed
or right handed configuration, there is solutions
where the elbow is up, that means that the
elbow is higher than the shoulder or where
the elbow is down; that's where the elbow
is below the shoulder and there's solutions
where the wrist is flipped or not flipped,
that's a rotation of 180 degrees in the configuration
of the wrist. For the case of the robot with
a two fingered gripper, as is shown here,
then a rotation of 180 degrees around the
wrist axis, leaves two fingers in effectively
the same configuration and it makes no difference
when it comes to grasping an object, picking
it up or putting it down.